Welcome to John Byer.
We had an interview, you and I, once before, in Cambridge over at the Charles Hotel, I believe, on the occasion of the previous novel.
Of the Last Voyager Cinema.
Right, right.
Exactly.
And there are... I remember the face.
It seems that there are... I mean, the medical workers are certainly resident out there.
Life remains a voyage.
1390.
My last, my first book tour, that was.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Did you have to be persuaded to do that?
A little bit, and I did it.
I am a long-time coach of other writers, and among the reasons why I did it was that the publisher never asked me before.
I had the new publisher, Little Brown, for the last board.
They'd give me, by my standards, an okay advance.
Why not?
I'll tell my student what it's like.
You don't mind us going off on a couple of tangents?
No, not at all.
I mean, the novel for itself, certainly.
How did you respond?
I'm curious, because it is a wrangling question.
Well, my hesitation has to do.
I cut my teeth on the big modern.
Joyce and Kafka and Proust, and that was another world.
They didn't do things like that.
Though I kept telling myself I bet Dickens and Twain did.
I bet they did.
Anyhow, I wanted to try.
My apprehensions were they were a little bit in for a ding, but it turned out not to be at all.
It was a reading tour, mainly.
My readings, which I do with some regular anyhow, are usually to university audiences, so it was interesting for me.
to tour, especially those big Midwestern and West Coast bookstores.
Those great big bookstores that are really oases of literary culture.
We have a couple here in Boston now that are Waterstones.
That's where I'm reading tonight.
That's a new one today.
Last time I was here, it was the Cambridge Bookshop does its readings in the Cambridge Library.
That's what I was living back in university.
There's really quite a competitive situation now, I mean, where all these bookstores are bringing in authors, and if you're talking about Waterstones, then you can't go to Wordsworth.
I'm not convinced by the way that it makes any economic sense whatsoever.
It may in some cases, but what it costs them, I mean, look, we're here in the street, and they've got the airfare, they've got the restaurant charges.
They're not going to sell those books.
That's not the way the bookkeeping works.
Except that it's good to get them the name.
I mean,
It's good to get the book and the author, I think, visible.
What do I know?
It's their economics for them to figure out.
So, I guess the burning question is biography and fiction here together.
Yes, and your interview is the first of this little mini-tour.
I'm just doing a few East Coast citizens trying to get back home, because my wife can't travel with me.
She's still teaching.
It'll give you a chance to warm up on some of those questions.
You will be the first to... I'll softball.
Well, I found myself... I don't much like autobiographical fiction.
I know some writers who do it well.
We know that writers like John Updike, for example, often work very close to the bone, although not always.
So I've tended to steer away from it.
I noticed in The Last Voyage, my previous novel,
that the here-and-now sections of that novel, contrasted with the long-ago and far-away Scheherazade sections, were, while not autobiographical, much closer to various data of my actual experience than had been the case in previous novels.
The most autobiographical things I had written before, the Greek mythological novella back in the old days, there was enough distance there in the situation to let me be a little person.
But I found myself, when the last order was done, and I was making notes toward what to do for an encore, interested in examining—I guess I had reached the sort of junior, senior citizen age, where one becomes interested in reviewing the waypoints that got you where you are, for better or worse, reimagining those waypoints.
And I ended up, for better or worse, as the program note to this floating opera says, bottling a kind of memoir in a kind of novel.
it must be obvious to anybody who reads whether they know anything about my brother or humdrum life or not, that the framing story, which is the novel that encases the memoir, a story of the voyage of the narrator and his wife, which is the humongous storm, and he gets lost in life.
That's all fiction.
My wife and I are sailors, but we don't get caught out in storms or nothing like that.
But I thought to myself, this addresses the two great what-ifs
of my personal life.
What if, tongue and key, what if I were ever to lose this pen, which they replicated perfectly on the cover here, my immortal British maid, Parker 51, which I regard as the totem and instrument of my authority.
And what if, God forbid, anything should ever happen to my connection with this book's dedicated to, my wife, who might have been happily married for 20 to 23 years now.
Well, the scenario, the overture of the opera quickly sees to it that both of these things come to pass, otherwise there'd be no story, of course.
The guy gets lost in the marshes, loses his pen overboard, gets separated in the labyrinthine marshes of a place very like near where I grew up on the lower eastern shore of Maryland, gets separated from his wife, that he's enough to do in those labyrinthine marshes, and finds, you know, by this time we're out of it here and now and into the realm of
the mythical labyrinth and the mythical quest.
He finds it in order to get back to where he wants to go, back to where he started, like Dante in the Dark Wood.
He's got to go not through hell, the purgatory and paradiso, but back to square one, which, a prospect that he greets with a groan and a roll of the eyes.
And then he gets involved in a kind of laser holograph version of This Is Your Life.
Now, in the memoir part,
The chief element of fiction, of course, other than the mechanics of the thing, this hyperspace in which all that takes place, the chief element of fiction is that my novelist intuitions told me early on, there needs to be a foil, there needs to be an opposite number, a kind of combination, best friend, confidant, bête noire, artistic conscience, and Marley's ghost.
That one.
who might give the ponderous name, the humorous name of J. Wordsworth Scribner, that's a name that he himself, an invented character, has assumed tongue half in cheek.
And he turns, he plays the role.
The book is about vocation, the calling, and this guy plays the role of the gooser, you know, the catalyst, the one who prods the action along.
No such person as I need as to say existed in my own history would that there had been one.
I would have gotten through things
probably with a little less sweat.
But he is Jay Scribner.
He's an affectionate amalgam of a number of friends I've had, both as a child and as a student and so forth, and as an adult, plus some I never had and should have had.
Plus an alter ego.
He is a kind of counter-self in that respect.
How about the conception of the story?
Did it start as this exercise for you, or did the story, in terms of creating a narrative here?
The story started when I had finished The Last Voyage and was making notes toward whatever next thing, trying to figure out.
My muse is a little bit like those Hollywood monsters that mumble things, and the heroine says, I think it's trying to tell us something.
And I listened to these mumblings and found out what it's trying to say.
I wrote a little short piece that ended up in the Paris Review, and it ends up in here, called Jack and Jill.
Those were the nicknames of my opposite twin sister and myself, Lamonis Meyer, a slightly older brother.
And that exegetical area, as I called it, Jack and Jill, became the germ of the notion of taking this guided tour through my rather unexciting history.
to look for the waypoints that seemed to me turned this particular semi-rural, semi-redneck, lower middle class kid into a novelist.
I'm interested in that in part because we're interested in ones on track, in part because I've watched so many other novelists, young novelists come to fruition or not come to fruition under my own coaching over the decades.
No autobiography.
I'm a fiction writer, and I could not write one chapter without immediately making up things that would make, not my life more interesting, but would make the narrative, otherwise it would be a tedious story.
Do you basically suggest that your life is boring if told in a straight memoir?
There is no complete telling thing straight, but I did come to appreciate
Nick, as I think anyone can... Happy to be cute with the question.
No, no, no, not at all, but I did come to appreciate very rapidly that, as the program says, every life does have a Scheherazade's worth of stories, and a person could tell any story of one's life as a series of sexual liaisons, as a series of job-career moves, as a series of ideologies subscribed to, as a series of magazines subscribed to, I think, any series of things.
can hang together a story of your life, and you get a somewhat different story depending on what waypoints you choose to organize the trip by.
I chose a vocation simply not to let the thing sprawl or deliquest into a random connection, a random string of anecdotes about a life which, objectively speaking, has not been a broad viewer of life.
For example, last week, I think it was, Mario Vargas Llosa published his memoirs.
Now, here's a guy who's lived an extremely colorful life, you know, including running for president of Peru and doing all sorts of dangerous and bravura things.
My life, fortunately, because I don't envy that sort of thing, my life has been, by and large, a fairly tranquil one.
I've been a teacher all my adult life and a novelist.
The most exciting things that have happened to me have happened in the head, in the imagination, at the desk, under the quiet circumstances, and it doesn't make very exciting readings.
How to tell it, then, well, the voyage, the disorientation, or potential loss of self and other, on which you have to get a new handle in order to proceed, in order to recover, partner with, and what they have come to stand for.
It's much more pleasant telling stories, making up stories, than the universe.
Well, would you say the most exciting parts are invented?
People find different things exciting.
In the objective way, the most durer part of the thing is the big storm, the loss of way that drives them into marginal, and that's purely invented.
It's an extrapolation, as many things in fiction are, from things that I've experienced, but thank God never that.
This is fiction as exorcism or preventive medicine, imagining the worst that will happen.
within the novel itself, within the memoir part of the novel, it does deal, in what I hope, in the most discreet way, with the single most harrowing experience of my 60 now, four years, the end of my 20-year first marriage, and we've ended up in my divorce, and so far a very successful and happy 20-something year now.
remarriage, but that's a story, as the chapter head says, that's a story too banal to tell.
It happens nowadays in America to what is 50% of all American marriages in the separation report.
Nevertheless, there were children involved who then, thank God, were on their way off to college.
They were almost out of the nest, but not quite.
And that made things somewhat less terrifying, perhaps, for innocent bystanders than it might have been in 18,
and there's going to be a whole lot of parenting.
Nevertheless, I think it's a rather happy life that has had in it so far.
Nothing more terrifying than that, a divorce which I'll ask for both parties, and now it turns somewhat acrimonious, despite the parties resolved and it moved on.
At what point did this structure of the opera come into play?
Well, when it occurred, you know, you do listen to what your muse is trying to mumble, and when I saw that my notes were saying, narrator, like Dante in dark wood gets lost, must retrace steps or go to the bottom of things or back to square one in order to get where he's going to go, the few things that were prominent in my mind at the time, this was 1990 when I began to write it, two years before Columbus Day.
I, in fact, began to write in just about the budget and dates a little bit, just about Columbus Day, 1990.
I began to draft sentences, and it occurred to me, what about if I suppose I had a friend who did things more boldly than myself, who instead of taking a little end-of-the-season sale right about Columbus Day, really decided to do Columbus's voyage in reverse, the return, and then right on, you know, back up the Mediterranean, up a mile, over to the Rift Valley, back to mankind's square ones.
With that as a kind of guide or parameter, it didn't take too long for the framework of the book to fall together.
Though this one was not meant to be a sailing novel, I just finished the sailing novel.
So I tried to keep the actual navigation passages to a minimum.
You mentioned that this is your pen here on the jacket.
So did you basically sketch out your idea for the jacket art?
No, they said, do you have any ideas?
And at this time, I'd finished the book
By the time Columbus Day 92 came around, I'd just finished the first draft, and my wife and I had the loan of an apartment in the Bahamas for that winter, and I took the book down there, and the Bahamian currency that year was a commemorative currency for Columbus's first landing.
And when the people at Little Brown Graphics said, you have any idea this book?
I said, well, look, you've got a lot of stuff on it.
You brought that with you, I should point out, for my tape here.
Are you going to use this in your reading?
This is my bookmark.
Well, that's your bookmark.
They then, and I said, you know, there is that pen, and there's sailing.
So they somehow found an exact replica of this Parker 51, which dates from 1963, 62, excuse me,
In fact, that's the perfect color.
That's the absolute shape.
Then they chopped up the currency.
In its first version, it looked to my wife to be a bit like a book about drug money laundering in the Bahamas.
So they softened down that a little bit, put a floating opera in it.
We've got the floating opera in here.
And they put a Chesapeake Bay blue crab on there.
And they had it one sale.
The graphics, like Edgar Poe, didn't know the difference between a cutter and a sloop.
It's very nice, though.
Yeah, I like that.
The floating opera idea, to circle back to your question, when I realized that it was going to be a kind of back-to-square-one thing, and since it's seen as vocation, not those other possible series of waypoints I mentioned, it occurred to me, one, and it is another sea yarn, for better or worse, in its frame.
Anyhow, I thought, why not go back, as it were, to the first book I ever published?
the floating opera, and use an operatic format.
This one, as I didn't in the original one, but the other one had a showboat in it, which took the place in the opera.
Here I decided, since I am an opera fan, why not have a narrative in the form of recidivism with arias and interleaves?
It clearly seems that all of these books are part of a...
much broader canvas.
Is that a fair... Yeah, though I think the differences between them are at least as large as any similarities.
They do all proceed out of the same imagination and there is that kind of maybe arbitrary organicity about them.
It makes me uncomfortable when over sophisticated critics will say it's actually the whole thing will add up to a mega novel.
I guess there's a loose sense in which you could say that about all of Faulkner, or all of Thomas Mann, all of any of them, because it does proceed out of the same imagination.
Well, I think certainly in Faulkner.
In Faulkner, where the characters occur and the situation is the same, there's a little bit of that in my work, but it seems to me, God, that whatever general... Well, I don't think there's a little bit of a cow here, so to speak, over there.
Yeah, it is a kind of a tidewater yacht to which I leave and to which I return.
The Giles Goatboy novel, the novellas and short stories, which are reorchestrations of dream classical myths, can't even know anything to do with the solemn immersion and so forth, though there isn't as much me in them, it seems to me, and some preoccupation with the same kind of things.
A little reading I'll get tonight at Waterstones, for example, is an idea from here about messages in bottles, something that's fascinating since I've been a kid.
It certainly runs through some of the Greek novellas, the Greek mythical novellas that I wrote as well.
You do have... Italo Calvino used to say that every writer has a hand of cards, and then he recombines them and reshuffles them, you know, but essentially it's leaving.
You can discard a few, maybe pick up a few, but essentially you're playing the same hand of cards.
Didn't Walker pursue anything message in the bottle, I think.
He has got a thing left in the bottle.
He actually used that title.
That's right.
The title.
Do you have a reader in mind when you're drafting these little works?
Do you have somebody?
This reader.
And increasingly, over the decades of the books that I've dedicated to my wife since 1970 when we married, she has been conscious.
She happens to have an astonishing eye for sentences and an astonishing memory for what cards have been played.
She's my editor of First Resort, and she'll be the one who can say, you can't say this here, because over here you said this other thing, you know.
And I'll say, by God, they don't quite jump in this particular world.
In all books.
Oh, really?
There's that kind of consistency.
And the reader, and that's the reader I have in mind frequently, I like these things, is Shelley.
in that sense.
What would Shelley think about this?
Is this going to strike her as a dopey reaction, or is this the way this person would really respond in this context?
I've learned to trust her on that.
I don't always take her advice on what we think anything.
I was about to say, where Shelley says, oh, this doesn't work.
Well, then it's either one that I decide to
Nevertheless, I want it there for a reason I can't always explain.
To get angry?
No, no, we don't.
These conversations are on the level of two in our teacher's focus.
I know my wife will read.
She's my first.
I just finished my own book, by the way.
No compliment.
Thank you.
It's published by Henry Holtz early next year.
Non-fiction.
What sort of book?
It's on Bibliomania.
Book Madness.
But in any case, my wife will read and challenge me on something.
And when I know she's right, I get angry, you know.
But, you know, I spent my life, you do, and your way too, but I spend my life fixing other people's metaphors, and, you know, these are excellent apprentices, the graduate students, and some are publishing already.
And I'm always telling me, you know, I need to take this character out, he's not earning his pay on the payroll, you know, combine these two.
Have something more interesting happen here.
This is terrific.
This sucks.
You get a little used to doing it.
So you've certainly got to get used to taking them with somebody.
And you know, of course, everybody knows what advice immediately makes good sense, what advice, well, I'll pretend I don't think it ever, and what just won't do.
I know that as one who writes... My real editors, by the way, are good at that, too.
I've had a whole series of editors at different publishers over my life.
except for one who was a good editor in the sense of fighting your battles with the hierarchy.
That's an important editor.
It is, but who didn't edit.
All the other ones I've had, I'm speaking of three or four or five, not eight or nine or ten, have been sharp editors whose advice, again, I don't always follow, but whose advice I've been able to take seriously, and more often than not, will at least attempt to follow.
I have my respect for those.
I hope you luck out with your editor as well.
I've got Alan Peacock.
Oh, yeah, I know that.
A young guy.
For sure, yeah.
He's Bob from Robert Owen Butler, and I'm thrilled to have him.
I'm sure I'm having him number one because he loves my book.
Good, yeah.
That's a start.
For sure.
Is that a lot of success when will we be published?
Early next year.
We just sold it.
Does that start again, one of the things?
Sure.
One of the things I learned on my last and major tour from Little Brown for the last toy and so by the sailor was to be a little more careful about my, what had become a reflexive opinion on my part, that the reading public is withering away and everybody's attention spans are shorter and the books are going away and the rhinoceroses and the whales are...
And in those, particularly in those Midwestern and West Coast places like Hungry Mind and the Tattered Cover and Powell's and so forth, they are not only busy LACs of a literary culture, they have like one reading a night in many of those places.
But they told me, a couple of them told me, that the volume of their business had been increasing in some cases at 15, 20% a year, you know, which is extraordinary.
Want to have another story?
We've learned that one crop agriculture is a bad thing.
You know, Americans have learned they better exercise more, smoke less, drink less.
Well, they may be learning that a one media economy is not a good idea either, you know.
Well, let me ask, for me now, I'm in seven newspapers and growing every week, I should be pleased to say.
I have vital signs that I can check.
I write something.
this morning, and it'll start being published tomorrow and through Sunday, and I'll hear from people.
For you, what are the vital signs for you?
I mean, I'm not writing out into any vacuum.
I mean, I noticed, you know, in your beginning, October 90 to 12 October 92, and there's this period, this creative void.
I mean, that's not too long, almost, but far from a void.
It's not a void, but I mean, it's just like you're in this place where you're not
What, for you, are the vital scientists?
When do you feel it?
I think I know what you mean.
Unlike such a writer as my friend John Updike, for example, who, even when he's working on a novel, is publishing other things.
So there is a dialogue going on between him and his readers, him and his editors.
For me, this was fast for many, two years, two and a half years.
For me, typically, it's 41 American presidential administration.
It takes me one American presidential term, rather, or the time it takes to matriculate and get a bachelor's degree.
That's usually how long it takes me to write a novel.
And in that period,
I have, by and large, no contact or virtually no contact with my editor, with my agent.
I like to present them, for example, with faits accompli.
I'm not one of those writers.
I know some who send up each chapter because they won't respond.
I've got my wife for that, you know, my muse for that.
That doesn't mean, though, Nicholas, particularly as you go along in your career, that doesn't mean that the dialogue in slow time between oneself and one's readers stops, you know.
You get mail.
It may be that somebody's just picked up Giles' Goat Boy, which for me, that was me back in the mid-1960s, but it's new to them.
Or even the Floating Opera, the first one.
Thank God I've been fortunate enough so that most of the books, not all of them, most of the books are still around in print.
And so it delights me when, even at a reading like tonight, there will always be somebody who's got
three kilograms of your old stuff, you know.
Well, that's touching, and it means that even though your audience may not be the mass audience, not to mention the large audience of more commercially successful literary novelists like Bill Styron or John Updike or who have you, still, the books don't
disappear.
They haven't disappeared.
They're out there.
Some people, including another generation of students, let's say, is picking up on them one way or another.
And that kind of mail, although it doesn't swamp me, is gratifying.
It's not as if the mail may bring some bags of this stuff, but letters come in from time to time, which do encourage one to believe that reading it, if it's an art that's under attrition, it's not one that's kaput already.
It encourages me to hope that
that the preserves in which readers and novels and novelists continue to persist into the 21st century, while they're going to be small, maybe they won't be extinct.
It may be that the rainforests and the whales and the rhinoceros and the tigers will survive in a slightly larger number than the worst scenarios.
But God, there is no question about that.
but the other media, and now CD-ROMs and Hypertech and things like that.
Every one of those things, like having a new restaurant in town where there's a limited number of customers, and we can still only eat three meals.
There's going to be some shading off.
Well, it doesn't go back to what you said earlier.
You really aren't writing for any particular reader.
I really am not.
The need for this kind of...
I hate that computer word, input, you know, but responds, I guess.
Right.
Not only that, you know, I'm old enough and I've done enough now so that I am less concerned.
You know, I always hope the books will do all right.
After all, I'm practicing the medium of the novel, which begins as a genre of popular entertainment.
And it still delights me, as I've said somewhere here, it still delights me when a really good novelist
a no-holds-barred great literary artist, manages at the same time, in that wonderful 19th-century pre-modernist way, also to be rather remarkably successful.
I'm thinking of people like Garcia Marquez, for example.
A hundred years of solitude or love in the time of cholera float up to the top of the old New York Times.
It's as rare as having a splendid human being win a popular political election.
All that's unthinkable, but now that it happens.
Are you working on a... I was going to say, we've got about another ten.
Are you working on another novel now?
Well, no.
A thing has happened to me that just delights me, Nicholas.
I found when I finished... I got two books out of the house last year, which for me is a remarkable productivity.
Just one, and the other one, I'm cheating, the other one's a second collection of essays.
Most of them have already been published, but Little Brown will bring that out in the fall.
And with that double postpartum,
feeling after getting two books out of the shop in the same calendar year, I found, to my delight and astonishment, that all the ideas that were coming to me were ideas for short stories.
For the first time in 25 years, I'm like a kid with a new toy.
The Lost in the Funhouse stories, which were all written in the first half and the middle 60s, the book was published in 68, was the last time I ever practiced the short form.
And I'm just, I can't get enough of it.
I've been writing with a clip of about one a month for the past six or seven months.
Isn't that great?
It's interesting, from here I go to Grace Paley, who admits I can't write a novel, it's a failure.
I mean, I'd love to see her novel, but it's not a failure.
My own feeling is... Her novel may be the thing, I've got to tease Grace about this one, that says your book, Jack, still keeps saying a novel in the works, a novel in the works.
Well, I think its purpose was to be there so that she could get her short stories written.
And my story, because I am a bookman, I don't care where these stories appear.
The first one appeared in Harper's, three others are appearing, and four others in literary magazines.
But already I'm thinking in terms of the book, and I know now, no short story writer thinks this way.
I know now that there will be 12, and when I've written the 12th one, I'm finished with that, and that's the book, and I know what order they want to be in the book.
Is there a theme for you?
There will be a counterpoint of themes, and some of them we'll have to do.
I was actually inspired by this.
Some of them we'll have to do.
I have been a teacher for too long, I suppose, a coach.
taking cliches of narrative, like formula, like once upon a time or and then one day.
Remember Grace's book, by the way, later that same day?
And then one day, on with the story, et cetera.
Many, in other words, are stories that are, if not about storytelling, because I hope they're not just about that, are inspired or suggested by some of these narrative formulas and so forth.
Others, by matters of little scientific and philosophical conundrums that appeal to me and to which I try to give some human resonation.
The first one, that one in Harford, was called Ad Infinitum, a short story, and it's really based on Zeno's paradox about, the fifth paradox about having, that you can cut a distance, say, in half forever and not get to zero.
And I made that into a story about a woman who has to deliver terrible news to her husband.
And, you know, until she has the news, he doesn't.
Until he gets it, as if everything is still all right.
To get there, she has to cross half the lawn and then half the other lawn.
So a serious situation is even a pathetic one, but structured by that.
Just quickly, because I know you have another friend coming up.
Do you feel that you have to break the ground
I would get bored if, I'm not radical, I don't like the idea of an author feeling that he or she has to reinvent him or herself each time.
That goes, time takes care of that.
But, you know, so I've written three novels, let's say, or four, whatever it is, that involve voyages, for example.
I may have, that may be enough of that.
I thought of this book, by the way, Nicholas, as my last book in the sense that, I think I get said in here too, in the sense that
I hope it'll be the last go-round on certain themes that I've been riffing like an old jazz musician for the last 30 years or so.
One of the reasons why it delights me to find myself doing short stories is that's something new.
And even though some of the echoes, there may be reverberations out of them.
There's that old hand of cards and things again.
But I hope they won't overtly be about sailing or notes in bottles or Scheherazade or things like that.
They will be about
stories as, you know, telling stories as part of living, because I am one with Scheherazade on that, that equation of hearing and, you know, giving and receiving stories as being tantamount to being alive.
And, you know, when we're lost interest in that, we're lost interest in being alive.
That's a great quote to quit on, by the way.